

===== PDF PAGE 1 =====

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS. VOL. 25, NO. 3. MAY 1989 2745 
The Mathematical Model of Induction Heating of 
n 
Ferromagnetic Pipes 
TADEUSZ P. SKOCZKOWSKI AND MARIAN F. KALUS 
Abstract-In this paper a mathematical model of coupled heat trans- 
fer and electromagnetic phenomena in induction heaters of ferromag- 
netic, steel pipes has been described. The model takes into account the 
nonlinearity of all coefficients, the characteristics of the supply source, 
and the thermal influence of the lining. A method of partial decoupling 
of fields has been proposed. Experimental verification of the computed 
results has also been presented. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
UR TASK is to build a mathematical model of phys- 
0 ical phenomena which occur during a process of in- 
duction heating of ferromagnetic pipes. The phenomena 
are of electromagnetic, thermal, metallurgical, and 
strength types. The most characteristic feature of induc- 
tion heating seems to be the fact that all of them are closely 
coupled. Because of the complexity, only the two domi- 
nating fields-eletromagnetic and thermal-are to be con- 
sidered in this model. There are some factors which make 
the induction heaters difficult to design. The main factors 
are: the presence of several coupled physical fields and 
the need to describe them with partial differential equa- 
tions, nonlinearity of all coefficients, complex heat ex- 
change among all parts of the heater, great variety of geo- 
metric configurations and shapes of heated bodies, and a 
large number of possible manufacturing processes. 
11. MATHEMATICAL DESCRIPTION 
The coupled electromagnetic and temperature fields in 
an induction heater may be expressed by a set of differ- 
ential equations-the Maxwell equations for the electro- 
magnetic field and the Fourier-Kirchhoff equation for the 
temperature fields [3]. 
We assume that the pipe and the coil are both infinite 
and axisymmetrical, the bodies are idealized homoge- 
neous and isotropic, the presence of coil windings is ig- 
nored when the heat transfer phenomena are considered, 
the heat generated due to hysteresis loop is neglected in 
comparison with that due to eddy currents. 
When all the assumptions have been accepted, the two 
fields may be described in cylindrical coordinates in the 
Manuscript received September 30, 1987; revised June 25. 1988. This 
paper was presented at the International Symposium on Electromagnetic 
Fields in Electrical Engineering, Pavia, Italy, September 23-25, 1987. 
The authors are with the Electrical Engineering Department, Silesian 
Technical University, Gliwice, Poland. 
IEEE Log Number 8826000. 
= 0 (3) 
where H is the field strength, Tis temperature, t is time, 
p is magnetic permeability, p is electrical resistivity, y is 
mass density, c is the specific heat, A is thermal conduc- 
tivity, r is the variable radius, and subscript L refers to 
the lining, subscript 2 to the heated body. 
The initial and the boundary conditions which mainly 
determine the accuracy of the results and the running time 
can be formulated as follows: 
For the electromagnetic field: 
the initial conduction 
H(r, 0) = Hp (4) 
the boundary condition at the external surface of the 
When at the external surface magnetic flux density is 
forced, the electrical circuit consisting of a source and a 
heater can be described by an expression of the following 
type: 
pipe. 
where U, is the voltage of the source, i, is the current of 
the coil, R is the total resistance of the heater, L is the 
inductance of the coil and the air gap, and \k2 is the flux 
in the pipe. 
Applying the Ampere and Faraday laws one can write 
001 8-9464/89/0500-2745$01 .OO O 1989 IEEE 

===== PDF PAGE 2 =====

2146 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 25, NO. 3. MAY 1989 
where w is the number of windings of the coil, 1, is the 
length of the coil, and subscript e refers to the external 
surface. 
Since the resistance and the inductance of the heater are 
not known at the begining of the computations, they must 
be estimated in a short iterative process applying the 
equations from the classical induction heating theory to 
obtain the initial values. 
When at the external surface the field strength is forced, 
the condition can be simply written in the following form: 
il(t) * w 
4 
H,(t) = ~ 
(7) 
the boundary condition at the internal surface of the pipe: 
where subscript i refers to the internal surface. 
assumption of axial symmetry one can write 
If we consider the case of a solid cylinder, from the 
111. CHANGE OF COEFFICIENTS DURING THE HEATING 
CYCLE 
All the preceding equations are strongly nonlinear due 
to the dependence of all their coefficients on the field 
quantities: namely, on the field strength and temperature. 
They were given in an analytical form and tabulated at the 
first entry into the program. 
For steel the thermal coefficients take the form 
- A2 
eh( X3 * (T - 975)/1000)' 
E = (1.5, . * * , 2.5) percent (16) 
+ c2 * exp (e3 * (T - 768l), 
E = (2.2, . * , 4.9) percent (17) 
- = 0, aH 
ar for r = 0. 
For the temperature field in 
the initial condition 
Tz(r, 0) 
the boundary conditions 
= T, 
E = (0.6, * , 2.0) percent (18) 
(19) 
+ 273f - (TL, + 273f) 
where E is the maximum error of approximation within the 
( 1) temperature range from 0°C to 1200°C. 
For chamotte lining, the thermal coefficients take the - 
following form: 
(20) 
(21 1 
(22) 
W 
m "C 
(12) a T2 
at X,(T) *- =  CY^ * (T, - T,) 
XL(T) = (0.697 + O.OOO64 * T) * 1.1163 - 
where E is thermal emissivity, a is the convective heat 
ature. kg "C 
transfer coefficient, T, is the appropriate ambient temper- J cL(T) = (880 + 0.23 * T) * 4186.8 - 
For the temperature field in the lining: 
kg 
the initial condition m3 
YL = 1850 -. 
TL(T, 0) = TLp (13) The magnetic permeability has been found to be 
the boundary conditions 
TLy = Too 
where where To, is the average temperature of the coil cooling 
water and is assumed to be 50°C. ( /TI6 m 
1- 
a TL 
at AL(T) * - = q(T) ((Te + 273f - (TL, + 273)4) 
+ (YL * (re - TL!). (15) where Tc is the temperature of the Curie transition. 

===== PDF PAGE 3 =====

SKOCZKOWSKI AND KALUS: INDUCTION HEATING OF FERROMAGNETIC PIPES 2141 
Some reasonable doubts may arise when magnetic 
permeability is to be calculated. According to [3] for such 
strong fields as are applied in induction heating (H > lo4 
A/m) we can make use of an initial magnetization curve 
which is an average for all kinds of steels containing 0.22, 
... , 0.99 percent of carbon. The errors which may ap- 
pear from taking into account an average curve instead of 
the proper one for a certain kind of steel are less than 2.5 
percent. 
Electrical resistivity as a function of temperature has 
been described in this simple form 
where B is the temperature coefficient of resistance. 
The thermal coefficients a,, a2, aL which are functions 
of many factors, i.e., temperature, geometric shapes, and 
state of surfaces, have been approximated. 
IV. NUMERICAL METHODS 
Almost all analyses based on widely used methods, i.e., 
FEM, integral equations, provide the engineer with a pre- 
cise map of field quantities [4], [5]. An experienced man 
finds the information useful in correcting the design of an 
electromagnetic device to make its operation better and 
safer. But when one faces the problem of designing the 
supply source for that device, one requires the global 
quantities of the load. A further step is to be added-from 
the field distribution the global quantities must be de- 
rived. The easier and cheaper it is done the better. The 
problem becomes extremely severe when the load changes 
its properties during the work-induction heaters seem to 
be the best examples of that. In such cases, the finite dif- 
ference method is likely to be suitable due to a relatively 
small number of points at which the field is calculated. 
As the finite difference method has been chosen, the 
solution region in the pipe was taken to be either the entire 
pipe wall or a surface layer having a thickness of 4 * A,, 
where Ae accounted for magnetic permeability obtained 
from magnetization characteristic at the surface field 
strength He. The introduction of the finite approximation 
involves a leading error of O(At, Ar)2. 
Only (1 1) and (15) which described heat exchange be- 
tween the body and the lining were treated as nonlinear; 
for the temperature appeared in them in the fourth power 
and even small errors in temperature determination might 
have caused great errors in the heat flow calculations. 
The program was run with 63 and 31 grid points and 
for the latter grid the computed temperature error was 2.3 
percent as compared to the results obtained in the first 
case with a smaller Ar. 
V. AVERAGING METHOD 
The comparison of the equivalent time constants of 
thermal and electromagnetic processes shows that these 
differ considerably. Thus the solving of equations of both 
fields with the same time step seems very ineffective. To 
avoid these calculations of the thermal process, charac- 
terized by great inertia, a method from nonlinear mechan- 
ics has been applied; namely, the “averaging method” 
[6]. The main idea of this method is to split two motions 
into “a quick one” (in our case, electromagnetic) and “a 
slow one” (thermal). It is assumed that the quick field is 
periodic between two time points at which the thermal 
field is calculated. In (2) the average value of the internal 
heat sources is placed instead of the instantaneous value 
where w,, is the average value of internal heat sources and 
Ha” is the average value of field strength found to be 
n = 0, 1, 2 * * * . (27) 
Even though the method presented above reduced the 
calculation time, the time remained relatively long. Dur- 
ing the numerical experiments, it was found that there was 
no need to compute the magnetic field distribution in the 
pipe for every period of the magnetic field. No significant 
changes in temperature distribution have been observed 
when the new average value of internal heat sources was 
used in calculations when the temperature of the external 
surface of the heated body was increased by 5°C. This 
means that during the whole heating cycle up to lOOO”C, 
the heat sources are to be changed 200 times instead of 3 
times as it happens in the case of classical heat problems 
commonly applied to induction heating. Only when the 
temperature reaches the Curie transition, when the mag- 
netic permeability begins to slope, due to high tempera- 
ture, internal heat sources have been calculated more often 
in order not to overlook the Curie transition. Later, we 
again return to the previous algorithm of “sampling” the 
temperature field. 
The proposed method of decoupling the fields is an ap- 
proximate one and should be applied very cautiously de- 
pending on the thermal inertia of the system, but for en- 
gineering calculations it seems to be a very useful one. 
VI. INFLUENCE OF POWER SUPPLY SOURCE 
The character of the supply source which feeds any 
electromagnetic device, and the properties of its control 
system exert great influence on the heating process. This 
important feature is not usually taken into account when 
one sets up a mathematical model of any process. Let us 
discuss the constraints we face in induction heating. 
When the heater is fed from an ac machine medium- 
frequency generator, the frequency of the supply voltage 
remains unchanged during the whole cycle of heating. But 

===== PDF PAGE 4 =====

2748 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS. VOL. 2.5, NO. 3. MAY 
Ll 
Fig. I. Cross section of the considered induction heating system 
TABLE I 
KEY VALUES OF THE HEATER 
Supply voltage 
Maximum ac output voltage 
Maximum output current of 
Constant current of the 
Average frequency 
Thyristor recovery time 
Length of coil 
Number of windings 
Parallel capacitor 
Thermal constants: 
of the converter 
dc link 
inductor 
3 x 380 V/50 Hz 
600 V 
250 A 
426 A 
2.2 kHz 
1.0 m 
30 x $20 Cu 
t2 = 0.85, E,. = 0.8, 01, = 7 W/m’K, 
01~ = 13 W/m2K, 
yZ(T); X2( T); c2( T) same as for 
80 ps 
120 pF 
medium-carbon steel. 
when we consider a thyristor as a parallel converter, as it 
has happened in our case, the output frequency can vary 
in a wide range-that change cannot be neglected at any 
rate. The parallel converter must work at a frequency 
which is a little higher than the frequency of self-oscilla- 
tions of its resonant circuit. Also, it is varying when the 
heating cycle progresses due to the change in the induc- 
tance of the load when the capacitance remains un- 
changed. 
The program contained a special loop that adjusted the 
frequency used in computations to the resonant frequency 
in such a way that the thyristor recovery time was at all 
times equal to that required. 
It must also be determined which electrical quantity is 
controlled and stabilized by the source control system. 
Three main types are possible-when the supply power, 
the voltage across the inductor, or its current are fixed. 
We had the latter types, thus the boundary condition (7) 
was applied. 
VII. COMPUTATION RESULTS AND EXPERIMENTAL 
VERIFICATION 
In order to check the accuracy of the model outlined in 
this paper laboratory experiments have been carried out. 
Fig. 2, Waveforms of basic electromagnetic quantities. Ferromagnetic 
state. 
An induction heater of the rate of 100 kW and output fre- 
quency of up to 3000 Hz was built (Fig. 1, Table I). In 
Figs. 2-4, the computed waveforms of the basic electro- 
magnetic quantities are shown. In Fig. 2, the whole pipe 
possesses the ferromagnetic properties: in Fig. 3, the ex- 
ternal layer of the pipe has already lost the ferromagnetic 
properties while the inner layer is still ferromagnetic. In 
Fig. 4, the whole material is nonmagnetic. In the first two 
stages the waveforms are highly distorted due to ferro- 
magnetic properties. 
A comparison between the results presented above and 
the ones obtained from a simple harmonic model with a 

===== PDF PAGE 5 =====

SKOCZKOWSKI AND KALUS: INDUCTION HEATING OF FERROMAGNETIC PIPES 
-5tOT i 
2749 
-0.71 
-02 
(C) 
Fig. 4. Waveforms of basic electromagnetic quantities. Nonmagnetic state. 
TIME/PERIOD 
(C) 
Fig. 3. Waveforms of basic electromagnetic quantities. Transient ferro- 
magnetic state. 
magnetic permeability as a function of H, when the tem- 
perature distribution in the pipe was the same for both 
models, has been made [3], [7]. The differences between 
the two models have never been larger than 7 percent, 
which indicates that the influence of the distortions of 
electromagnetic quantities is in some way negligible when 
powers due to eddy currents are estimated. 
The best way to check the accuracy of the model was 
to compare the computed and the measured temperatures 
of the pipe and the resistance (power) of the heater. One 
comparison is shown in Figs. 5 and 6. A close agreement 
is apparent and the obtained accuracy was better than 10 
percent for temperature and 12 percent for resistance. 
UME ,rnrnl 
Fig. 5. Comparison between computed and measured temperature of the 
pipe. 
> lil .z5*- \ 
%L - 
6Jt ~~ -~ 
T"+ Pn 
Fig 6 Comparlson between computed and measured resistance of the 
heater 

===== PDF PAGE 6 =====

2750 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 25. NO. 3. MAY 1989 
VIII. CONCLUSION 
The unique attraction of the presented model is its 
mathematical simplicity, precisely written boundary con- 
ditions, taking into account the character of the supply 
source and the thermal influence of the lining. These fea- 
tures result in the utmost economy of computer storage 
and accuracy of computations. The proposed method of 
decoupling the fields has improved the economy of com- 
putations causing an insignificant decrease in accuracy, 
acceptable in most engineering problems, both in the field 
of electrical and process engineering. 
So far, this model has been used by us in the process 
of time-optimal control of induction heating of steel pipes 
when a microprocessor system was applied, as a main 
controller. 
REFERENCES 
J. D. Lavers, “Numerical solution methods for electroheat problems,” 
IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. MAG-19, pp. 2566-2572, 1983. 
W. S. Niemkov and W. B. Demidovic, “Effective algorithms of nu- 
merical calculations of induction heating equipment,” Electromech.. 
no. 11, 1984 (in Russian). 
T. Skoczkowski, “The analysis of electromagnetic and thermal phe- 
nomena in induction heaters of rotational bodies,” Ph.D. dissertation, 
Silesian Technical University, Gliwice, Poland, 1985. 
[4] W. R. Hodgins and J. F. Waddington, “The solution of 3-D induction 
heating problems using an integral equation method,” IEEE Trans. 
Magn., vol. MAG-18, pp. 476-480, 1982. 
[SI P. Masse, B. Morel, and Th. Breville, “A finite element prediction 
correction scheme for magneto-thermal coupled problem during Curie 
transition,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. MAG-21, pp. 1871-1873, 1985. 
[6] J. A. Mitropolskij, Averaging Method in Nonlinear Mechanics. Kiev, 
USSR: Naukova Dumka, 1971 (in Russian). 
[7] M. S. El-Markaby, T. H. Fawzi, and M. T. Ahmed, “Approximate 
treatment of nonlinear eddy current problems,” IEEE Trans. Mugn., 
vol. MAG-18, pp. 1737-1739, 1982. 
Tadeusz P. Skoczkowski received the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in 1977 
and 1985, respectively, both in electrical engineering, from Silesian Tech- 
nical University, Gliwice, Poland. 
Since 1977 he has been with the Department of Electrical Engineering 
of that university as a lecturer. His main activities are in the fields of elec- 
troheat theory, mathematical modeling of electroheat devices, and power 
electronics. 
Marian F. Kalus received the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in 1976 and 1986, 
respectively, both in electrical engineering, from Silesian Technical Uni- 
versity, Gliwice, Poland. 
He is involved in industrial work in the field of power electronics and 
control of induction heaters. His current research interests include micro- 
processor applications and computer control of electroheat devices. 